(Gulls cry)
Mr Poldark...
it is alleged
that you roused the neighbourhood...
and led a bloodthirsty mob
down to the beach.
- Incorrect.
- Which part?
They Were not thirsty for blood.
They were starving for food.
Did you encourage the riot
Which broke out on the beach?
I did not consider it a riot.
Do you approve of plunder
and lawlessness?
Do you approve of families being
Without sufficient food to keep them alive?
What part did you play
in the death of MattheW Sanson?
Regrettably, none Whatsoever.
(Sighs) Enough of this insolence.
Ross Vennor Poldark,
I am committing you for trial
at the Bodmin assizes.
Bail Will be set at 1 00.
And may God have mercy upon you,
for I, most assuredly, Would not.
(Wind Whistles)
Julia...
(Door opens)
Ross!
They let you go. I kneW they Would.
Did they dismiss all the charges?
Not quite.
I'm to be tried by Justice Lister
at the Bodmin assizes in five days' time.
I must present myself at the gaol
the night before.
Oh, God... how has it come to this?
George?
This entire thing is a nonsense.
I'll be back before you know I've gone.
he should never have been charged.
He's a gentleman, and a Poldark.
his own worst enemy.
I would speak to him, but he avoids me.
he avoids us all. Since they lost Julia.
Well, something must be done
or he will walk his head into a noose.
Or that new contraption they have in France.
If he's a sensible man, he will...
seek assistance.
have words in the ears of those that matter.
- The Boscowans?
- St Aubyns.
- Warleggans?
- (Scoffss)
When their cousin died in the wreck? No.
George is...
very likely behind the accusations.
But he could exert influence if he chose.
Mm. his reach...extends everywhere.
Why would George
throw his might behind Ross?
You're right. Why would he?
(Gulls cry)
- There's a storm coming.
- (Thunder rumbles)
Julia's afeared of thunder.
I keep thinking that she's still here.
And if I just call her name...
I'll be better, by and by.
I tell myself that every day. And every day I fail.
We must think of the trial.
- (Groans) Must we?
- Ross, 'tis no little thing.
It's a proper trial, not just a magistrate.
You must answer to judge and jury,
and if you're found guilty...
They cannot hang me.
- I've too much to do.
- Truly, Ross...
Truly, Demelza, I decline to be distracted
by matters beyond my control.
Give me_ leave to _attend
on something I can Influence.
(Low chatter)
Gentlemen! I leave for Bodmin in two days.
What are we waiting for?
No doubt ye aim to strike
a new lode before 'ee go.
A couple at least, so let's get down there.
New lode? he'll be luclq.
The old Trebartha lode's near petered out,
- but he won't have it.
- No more than he'll have this trial.
To hear him you'd think
he was heading for Michaelmas Fair.
Dwight.
he cannot just bury his head.
Then will you tell him? It's almost upon him.
how will he defend himself?
Who will speak for him?
I will. But there must be others,
and plenty of them.
_ The Crown _
WIII already have assembled Its case.
And no doubt there'll be plenty
who'll be glad to help it.
- Can I rely on you, Tankard?
- Of course.
Always happy to be of service.
Why is our attorney here?
he's been assisting the Crown
to strengthen its case.
Mm. Theft, riot,
attacking a customs officer.
- Is that not enough?
- I wanted murder.
I told you that charge would not stick.
Cousin Matthew was dead
before he washed ashore.
- Poldark merely found him.
- And left him lifeless on the strand.
_ _ - Which is not a crime. _ _
- But It IS a personal affront to this family.
And one which I intend to make him regret.
Prudence Paynter! My name's Tankard.
Acting for the Crown
in the case of Rex versus Poldark.
What do you recall the night of the shipwreck?
- Shipwreck?
- See thee now, woman.
When there's riot and robbery
like there was on that night...
The law says naught of those who follow
if it can lay hold of those who lead.
So, 'tis best for all concerned
that the right man should stand in the assizes.
The right man? Ross Poldark?
I never see'd sight nor sound of him.
Elizabeth. Are you alone?
I was about to return to Trenwith.
Would you consider a small delay?
(Chatter)
GEORGE: Are you suggesting I intervene?
- The family would be so grateful.
The family means little to me.
You alone are the person I care to please.
It distresses me to think
of my cousin at risk of his life.
It is I who would be indebted to you, George.
how difficult would it be to have him
come before a sympathetic judge?
There are ways of encouraging such sympathy.
But does Ross ask it of me?
You know, you and Ross
are more alike than you know.
I have said so. I said it to him.
I do not think he could fail to feel gratitude.
If he felt himself beholden,
if...if he could see his benefactor
in a new light.
So, you've made no arrangements?
- None whatsoever.
- Jeffrey Clymer, KC.
Your defence. he'll meet you in Bodmin.
Will he?
Next, your finances.
You are chief shareholder in Wheal Leisure.
Other than that, you have no income.
Your tenants regularly default on their rents,
your house is mortgaged
and you have outstanding debts
of 1 ,000 at interest of 40% .
My wife will be sorry she wed me.
Your wife deserves better.
Have you made a Will?
Course not.
- I need a list of all your assets.
- That shouldn't take long.
ELIZABETH: My dear Demelza.
I know that recent events
have caused a breach between our two families,
but wonder if I could persuade
you and Ross to visit us
at Trenwith tomorrow afternoon?
(Geese honking, traders calling out)
- Ah, Captain Poldark!
- Mr Trevaunance.
How goes your campaign?
Better than yours, I imagine.
- Who was that?
- No-one of any influence.
Jud Paynter?
Never heard of him.
You were on Hendrawna Beach
the night of the shipwreck.
- this will jog your memory.
- Ah, well, now...
Get off home,
you bladderwrackin', pifflin' piece of offal!
- Uncle Ray.
- Caroline!
My dear! And Mr Trevaunance,
our prospective member of Parliament.
I see you travel light, niece.
How long are you intending to stay?
That depends. If my little Horace and I get bored
we may be forced to return to London.
No doubt you're much in demand there.
An heiress is much in demand everywhere,
especially one who's not yet of age.
Why so?
It's assumed she'll do the bidding of her
wealthy uncle and marry where he chooses.
(Chuckles) You confident, Unwin?
Winning his seat or my hand?
Both, I trust.
I hope we can come to terms soon, sir.
I hope so, too.
She runs rings round her old guardian.
I'm sure a younger man
would benefit from the exercise.
Did I mention I saw Unwin Trevaunance,
our would-be MP,
and his intended, Ray Penvenen's niece?
No doubt she's in town
for the election in Bodmin.
Never been to Bodmin.
Be grateful you're not going now.
Why?
The elections take place
the same day as the assizes.
The town will be seething.
Will Elizabeth go?
I shouldn't think so.
She sent us a note.
What could she want?
The same as I.
You did promise me after Julia died
that we would all be reconciled.
You still want that?
With the trial nigh upon us...
..maybe I'll be glad of the friendship.
Even though the cost is Julia?
Nay, Ross, you cannot lay it all at their door.
Why can I not?
'Tis why I do wish to make peace...
..despite all that we lost.
Will it not mean that Julia didn't die in vain?
It's good of you both to come.
- Is Francis here?
- Somewhere hereabouts.
I wanted to speak with you first.
To ask if some help might be given
when you come to court.
I hope you will take the gesture
with the kindness in which it's intended.
(Footsteps)
"Gesture"?
George might know the judge
who will hear your case.
How convenient.
And thought that perhaps he could be...
Pointed in the right direction.
For a price, no doubt.
Not one that you would personally need to pay.
But I see that I would.
(Door opens)
And it strikes me
as more than my liberty's worth.
- (Door closes)
- Demelza, we're leaving.
Ross...
Elizabeth, what's the meaning of this?
I...I thought if there was something
we could do to help Ross...
_ "We"?
- We appreciate the thought.
But not the method.
Ross...
You'll excuse us, George.
O course.
I thought it the least we could do.
- For Demelza's sake.
- Demelza's?
Of course.
Do they seriously imagine
I would stoop to beg favours
from that upstart poodle?
IfI wished to prostitute myself,
I'd sooner grovel to Ray Penvenen
who's actually acquainted
with Judge Lister.
- Is he?
- It really is the end for me and Francis.
- Where are you going?
- To the mine.
Where it's still possible
to do an honest day's work.
"A known Jacobin and revolutionary,
formentor of unrest and affray.
Once escaped justice
by taking the King's shilling,
fathered numerous bastards,
bedded and wedded his scullery maid
upon whom he got his latest brat,
this creature being a notorious doxy
from a family of murderers and thieves."
Our friend "Anonymous"
has an engaging style.
How many copies?
Enough to paper all Truro and Bodmin.
If he's found guilty, he could hang.
If he hangs, he'll have only himselfto blame.
Mistress Poldark to see Mister Penvenen.
Mrs Poldark?
I don't believe I've had the pleasure.
Forgive the intrusion, sir.
I was taken queasy as I was out walking and...
well, yours was the first house I saw.
Ah.
(Grunting)
'Tis no use, Ross.
The lode has petered out.
We knew it a week ago.
- So we give up?
- We move on.
FRANCIS: There sits our old mine.
Lost in a game of cards to a Warleggan.
Ross would never gamble away
his...most precious asset, would he?
He is too wise and clever.
Francis, what is done is done.
DEMELZA: Thank you forthe refreshment, sir.
I hope that you are not too downcast
about your husband's coming trial.
(Sighs) Truly...I fear the worst.
If only one knew
who the judge would be.
Oh, that's no secret, ma'am.
Tis Justice Wentworth Lister.
Oh. Are you acquainted with him?
Oh, we know each other.
He'll be supporting Unwin Trevaunance
at the election tomorrow night.
A stern fellow, though generally accounted fair.
(Sighs) It do puzzle me exceedingly
how a judge can be expected to listen to a case
and get to the bottom of it all in a few hours.
Does he never ask for the truth in private
before the trial begins?
(Chuckles) Perhaps he should!
- Will you be in Bodmin for the assizes?
- For the election, yes.
Well, I hope we may meet again, sir.
- Who is that, Uncle?
- Hm? Ross Poldark's wife.
- What does she want?
- She didn't appear to want anything.
Well, I doubt that, sir.
She looks like a dangerous woman to me.
Ross.
Well, this is well met.
May I walk with you awhile?
- I'm pressed for time.
- The encounter yesterday,
that was not my doing.
Still, I'd hoped we could put
past quarrels behind us.
I had hoped so, too.
But I find now I cannot.
Ross...
if something goes amiss in court,
how is Demelza fixed?
How is that your concern?
If your sentence is prison...or worse, erm...
..well, she would be entirely alone
with no source of income.
Whereas you yourself
are swimming in guineas?
No, no. I've erm...I've a little put by.
Why would you offer it?
I don't forget what we owe Demelza.
(Knock on door)
Mr Warleggan, ma'am.
Elizabeth. You look ravishing today.
- And you, too, of course, ma'am.
- I do not.
And nor, may I say, do you.
Quite pasty-faced.
Consequence of sitting
too long indoors fingering coin.
(Clears throat)
I've brought a small gift for my godson.
Oh. That's kind of you, George.
Papa!
Look, my very own horse.
Uncle George bought it for me.
Did he?
(Door opens)
George, here again.
I hope you're taking care of our guest, Elizabeth.
(Glass clinks, drink poured)
I saw my cousin just now.
He was not eager to exchange pleasantries.
No doubt he's thinking ofthe trial.
Do you think he'll be acquitted?
I don't see how he can be.
So many witnesses to his activities that night.
(Scoffs)
And the fact that he's treated the law
With contempt on preVIous occa5ions.
And the court will not be left in ignorance.
As I came past Sawle,
a villager showed me this pretty paper.
"The true and sensational life of Captain R P.
Adventurer, seducer, wrecker
and suspected murderer."
Yes, I've seen them about.
They're not important.
- Except to Ross.
- But ifthis is believed,
- it will prejudice the jury.
- Pay no heed, Elizabeth.
These scurrilous sheets are always defaming
one person or another.
Yes, but this author has gone
to some trouble and expense.
You wouldn't happen to know him...
would you, George?
I imagine he must be desperate
to earn his money in such a manner.
Only a bankrupt would sell his services that way.
(Drunkenly) They had no tail nor bill
They had no tail nor...bill
Jud Paynter.
'Tis said that you and your good wife
were once servants of Captain Poldark?
And his father afore him.
And that after serving faithfully
for all those years
- you were turned out without a word.
- Monstry ingratitude!
So you understand your duty under the law
is to report what you saw
the night ofthe wreck?
We know you took part
in the riot and pillaging.
We know you played a part
in resisting officers ofthe Crown.
I never 'eard such...
But we're willing to overlook all that
if you will turn King's evidence.
You owe him no loyalty.
It's common sense to testify against him.
We'll make it worth your while.
I have no idea what to say in your defence
and you leave for Bodmin tomorrow.
I was not on the beach,
so I cannot refute the charges
but from what I hear,
they are not easily dismissed.
Salvaging spoils from a wreck?
No jury in Cornwall will convict me ofthat.
- Attacking a customs official?
- Not guilty.
You doubt me.
We both know you're capable of it.
- Your situation is not good, Ross.
- I've seen worse. We've seen worse.
- On the battlefields of Virginia.
- And I salute you for saving my face.
Saving your neck may not be so easy.
I'll ask Demelza
not to come to Bodmin tomorrow.
So you and I will ride together?
Perhaps as we go
some brilliant defence will occur to me.
(Horse galloping)
(Music plays from inside)
Who's this fine lady?
- And what has she done with my wife?
-Judas!
(Laughs) Well, there she is.
For a moment, I thought I'd lost her.
Why? Cos she's prinked up to the nines
and her fizzog's powdered?
Clearly I needn't worry about you
when I'm gone.
You'll have a line of suitors
from here to Penzance.
So I should hope.
(Knock at door)
May I join you awhile?
Perhaps another night.
Good night, Francis.
Good night.
(Wood chopping continues outside)
So you leave me a-bed
like the Queen of Sheba
while you see to all the chores?
Is it not my duty to cherish my wife
while I'm here?
And to provide firewood for when I'm not?
I wish we could stay like this forever.
I wish so, too.
I'm only glad for your sake
you're not seeing me in court.
No, Ross.
You will stay here?
Yes, Ross, ifthat's what you wish.
Elizabeth? I'm leaving for Bodmin.
Shall I not come with you?
A court is no place for a lady.
It's a terrible thought, is it not?
A world without Ross.
I wonder how Demelza would bear it.
How would any of us bear it?
Which of us does not secretly adore him?
How different might our lives have been...
Had Ross not returned from the war?
Had he never gone away in the first place.
Goodbye, my dear. God bless you.
Francis!
- No.
- Hey...
You'll come home again?
I promise.
Ross!
PENVENEN: You spoilhim.
How else could I persuade him
to come to Bodmin with me?
Indeed, he wonders why
either of us must go at all.
You_tell him it is because
tonight is election night
and as Unwin's intended,
you are expected to be at his side.
Horace and I will spend an agreeable evening
in our lodgings eating jellies.
- Caroline...
- What?
You'd prefer I caught a cold in
some draughty assembly rooms
watching dreary men voting?
I may venture out later,
if Horace can spare me.
Bodmin, Horace.
I bet nothing of moment ever happens there.
(Town crier calling out)
Your room, sir.
Beg pardon, sir,
be you a surgeon or such like?
Iam.
There's someone took mortal sick
at Priory House.
I'll go at once.
(Approaching horses and carriage)
Verity!
I've saved you a place, my dear.
Thank you.
(Driver commands horses)
- You did tell Ross you're coming?
- Of course not.
(Laughter and chatter)
Jeffrey Clymer, King's Counsel.
I'm here to see
ifwe can wriggle you offthe hook.
"Theft, inciting a riot,
attacking a customs officer."
Impressive.
I'm a physician, ma'am. May I be of service?
I hope so. My darling little Horace has had
two fits and now he's barely breathing.
- Will you attend on him, please?
- (Whining)
Your dog?
Your footman made a mistake.
It would be a farrier you sent him for.
It's not my custom to employ
a horse doctor for Horace.
I want the best advice
and I'm willing to pay for it.
- What is your fee?
- (Sighs)
But perhaps you do not know
your trade well enough.
Perhaps you should leave.
We'll call someone else.
That was what I was about to suggest.
Wait.
Have you never had a dog of your own?
Yes.
Would you let him die
on a point offormality?
- How old is he?
- 12 months.
Fits are not uncommon at that age.
An aunt of mine had a spaniel.
His pulse is steady
and there's no sign offever.
Nevertheless,
I'd advise a lowering system oftreatment.
No more sweetmeats,
plenty of running and jumping.
Dogs do not need to be carried.
Have a druggist make up this paregoric
of black cherry water and Theban opium.
Thank you.
You were saying?
About your aunt's spaniel.
Oh. Er...yes. He used to have fits,
when she played the spinet.
One hesitates to say whether
he was musical or the reverse.
What is your name?
Following to your arrest,
your statement to the examining magistrate
was unhelpful.
I answered truthfully.
Is that not what the law requires?
A common misconception is the truth
is the same as innocence. It is not.
Myjob is to position the truth
so that you don't pay for it with your life.
I see.
So now we're politicians.
Positioning the facts
to suit our own ends.
And the people on the beach that day?
Shall we pretend
that they were not desperate?
Should we explain that starvation
and poverty are also relative?
Let me be clear. Anything other than
absolute contrition would be sheer folly.
So my task is to grovel?
Play the game by bending the rules.
Excellent.
(Bell clanging, shouting)
Thank you.
Oh, this town's a-boiling.
I forgot it was election week.
Yes, I lately met one ofthe candidates.
A friend of our neighbour Penvenen.
Indeed, later I must go out on an errand.
- With the streets full of drunkards?
- 'Tis for Ross I must do it.
(Hubbub)
- When are the votes to be counted?
- Not until this evening, sir.
Have you seen this?
There's been an assassination
of Ross Poldark's character.
How unfortunate.
- Not a single room?
- I'm sorry, sir, we're full.
- In the entire inn?
- I'm afraid not, sir.
(Scoffs)
Enys. Are you here for the trial?
- I am indeed. And you?
- Yes, I thought to look in.
Look, erm... do you know where
I can find a room for the night?
This place is full
and the town is fermenting with people.
You may be unluclq.
I trust your sister had the foresight
- to reserve her_room at The Crown?
- Verity's here?
I saw her go in just now, with Demelza.
Is your wife with you?
Erm...Elizabeth prefers
to remain at Trenwith.
If erm...ifyou should be
without a place to sleep tonight,
I'm at the London Inn,
beside the church.
You may be held to that.
Terrible thing!
A man of his standing,
and that young wife of his.
Francis, are you joining us?
Will I not be interrupting
your council ofwar?
- Against whom?
- My cousin.
As declared in your recent literary effort.
Excuse me.
It is a piece offiction
entirely worthy of you!
Tell me...
what could induce you to throw your weight
behind Ross instead of against him?
The very same question
your wife asked me.
Naturally, I could not now consider it.
Ross has offered me insolence
once too ofen.
In that case, may I offer you some advice?
- By all means.
- You may flaunt your guineas
on lavish garments and fancy carriages.
You may purchase a coat of arms
and deck out your servants in gaudy livery.
You may even buy your way into every club,
mine and drawing room in the county,
but what you will never buy...
..is nobility.
Or breeding. Or even common decency.
Are you quite sure you don't wish to apologise,
Francis?
Given the nature of our association?
Oh, you own me, I acknowledge that.
And my indebtedness to you
has long muddied the waters between us,
so I trust that any confusion...about my
feelings...
..is now entirely cleared up.
I'll visit you in gaol with a list ofwitnesses
who are to appear against you.
And those for me?
A shorter list.
Friends' and workers' testimony,
presumed biased, will be easily dismissed.
Meanwhile, I advise you
to reconsider your attitude.
_ It's no detriment to me
if you choose to run your neck into a noose.
But I suspect it might be to yours.
Mr Warleggan.
I see Unwin speaks the truth.
He cannot stir an inch without you.
- He says the same of you.
- Of course.
We're both indispensable
to his ascent in the world.
- I, as a hunting trophy...
- Caroline...
And you as...how to describe you?
Benefactor? Sponsor? Paymaster?
I am certainly lending my support
to his campaign.
- Shall we go out and wave to the crowd?
- And I am lending mine to his arm.
I wonder which one of us
stands to gain the most.
(Cell door clangs, keys jangle)
Are you sure Ross meant you to go out alone?
You're a lady, after all.
I was brought up a miner's daughter.
There's naught a few drunkards could do
that I couldn't give 'em back.
(Chatter)
"I am a voice crying in the wilderness!
Make ye ready the ways ofthe Lord.
For the kingdom of God is at hand!"
Father?
So. Now 'ee be cast into the pit, daughter?
Thy child is buried,
thy husband's to hang.
See now the wages of sin?
- I know of no sin.
- Turn again now, daughter.
- Come home and live a pure life.
- Thank you, Father.
I appreciate the offer, but...
I hope it will not be needed.
"'Vengeance is mine' sayeth the Lord.
'For the day of calamity is at hand."'
(Knock at door)
What have you forgot, Demelza?
- Oh.
- Have you brandy?
- Or rum?
- There's port.
Demelza's tipple.
(Glass clinks, drink poured)
Well, sister...
(Sighs)
How's it feel to be married
to a drunken brute?
Francis, I hoped...
What, that I'd come to make peace?
With my sister, perhaps.
But not with a Mistress Blamey.
We're happy, Francis.
And I hope the day will come
when you'll be glad for me.
- And allow me home to _Trenwith.
- As soon as you like.
As soon as you like.
Without him.
Oh, do I disappoint you?
Well, I disappoint most people.
Father. Elizabeth. Myself.
Why is it that I amount
to precisely nothing?
Whereas Ross...
Ross is considered such a threat
that men will spend a fortune
in order to get him hanged!
- And yet I envy him.
- You cannot.
IfI were going to meet myjudges...
..I would give them a piece of my mind.
Francis Poldark Esquire, of Trenwith!
Wouldn't be the first time today.
I...I met a man, handing out pamphlets
defaming Ross in the grossest manner
and I happen to know ofthe author.
And so I went and paid him a visit.
And left him in no doubt
as to my opinion.
George.
Was that wise when he owns
the very roof over your head?
Oh, no doubt he's planning this moment
how to punish me.
But he may be defrauded.
Do not lose heart, Francis.
Tomorrow's a new day.
A new day.
And it may never come.
I wonder if I shouldn't go to Bodmin.
To what purpose?
To be with Francis.
And his cousin?
Ross has Demelza.
Hm.
Be advised, sir.
The woman approaching is a harlot
and must, on no account, be admitted.
Excuse me, sirs.
Entry to the assembly rooms
is for voters only.
I've come to see Mr Penvenen.
He particularly asked for me.
- I bet he did.
- You can't come in.
I beg you to let me through.
'Tis all the reason I've come to Bodmin.
- My husband's life depends on it.
- Move along now.
Move along now!
Are you sure Dr Enys was agreeable
to 'ee sharing his chamber?
This is a small chamber, sir.
And but a single bed.
I shall not be needing a bed.
(Angry shouting from outside)
(Door opens and closes)
Oh, my dear, I was so worried.
The crowds in the square...
What is it? Did it all go wrong?
Not exactly.
(Footsteps)
I'm in no mood for visitors.
- (Keys jangle)
- Sounds ominous.
I hope I'm not disturbing you.
I was writing to my wife.
I've not come to fight, Ross. But to confess.
Confess myself disarmed. Impressed.
Well, of course you might have guessed
Elizabeth would ask me to intervene.
But would you guess that Francis did, too?
That Ray Penvenen
tried to fight your corner?
Alfred Barbery, Lord Deveran.
How do you inspire such loyalty?
It impresses me.
I see its value. I could use it.
I could do what they asked me to do.
Remove the hostile witnesses,
drop a word in the ear ofthe prosecution.
I could even take the stand
and give you a character reference.
How would that sway the jury?
The very man whose cousin perished?
What do you say, Ross?
Will you meet me halfway?
Will you take the hand offriendship?
Forgive me.
Are you truly so deluded?
Do you think I would
ever shake your hand?
(Chuckles)
No. No, not for a single moment.
But when you go to the gallows,
I'll be able to say, hand on heart,
to Elizabeth,
I offered Ross Poldark my help
and he turned me down.
So, thank you.
For being every bit as predictable
as I hoped you'd be.
And thank you.
For reminding me what can
and cannot be bought.
(Keys jangle)
(Cell door clangs shut)
My clear, where are you going?
I have one last thing I must try.
(Bell tolling)